MAE 6291 – Class 11
Lorena A. Barba, April 14, 2026


Revisiting tocify: An Agentic Research Workflow You Already Built
In Class 5, you forked the tocify repository, customized it for your own research interests, and set it running via GitHub Actions, either on a weekly schedule or on demand. At the time, the exercise was framed as a hands-on introduction to building custom automations: you learned about RSS feeds, GitHub Secrets, API integration, and scheduled workflows. You may have thought of it as a useful but relatively simple pipeline—fetch papers, score them, render a digest.
Now that you have the vocabulary of context engineering and agent design from Class 10, it is worth revisiting that system, because tocify already embodied most of the principles we formalized recently. You were practicing context engineering before you had a name for it.
Consider the architecture. The interests.md file—where you described your research focus in narrative prose and listed keywords—is static context. It plays the same role as a CLAUDE.md file: it tells the AI who you are, what you care about, and what criteria to apply when making decisions. It persists across every run of the workflow, unchanged unless you deliberately update it. The prompt.txt file is a hand-crafted system prompt with dynamic injection points: the {{KEYWORDS}}, {{NARRATIVE}}, and {{ITEMS}} placeholders are filled at runtime with content drawn from your interests file and the current batch of papers. This is the same pattern you saw in Class 10's discussion of dynamic context—information that enters the model's window only for the duration of a specific task and is discarded afterward.
The keyword_prefilter() function implements the principle of pre-processing context for consumption. Before any paper reaches the LLM, the pipeline runs a lightweight local filter that checks titles and abstracts against your keyword list and keeps only the top 200 matches. This is not a trivial design choice. Without it, every paper fetched from every RSS feed would be sent to the OpenAI API, consuming tokens (and money) on articles about immunology or astrophysics that have no bearing on your work. The pre-filter ensures that by the time data enters the model's context window, it has already been cleaned and scoped to what is relevant. For example, I discovered formatting issues in my interests.md file, where comma-separated keywords on a single line were treated as one giant keyword instead of individual terms, resulting in me having to debug a context pre-processing failure. The pipeline's scoring degraded not because the LLM was incapable, but because the input arriving at its context window was malformed.
The batching logic in triage_in_batches() reflects an implicit awareness of attention budgets. Rather than stuffing all 200 pre-filtered papers into a single API call, which would produce a context window so large that the model's attention to individual papers would degrade, the pipeline splits them into batches of 50 and processes each batch independently. This is precisely the kind of context scoping we discussed: give the model only what it needs for the immediate sub-task, collect the results, and move on.
Even the scoring calibration rules embedded in prompt.txt—instructions like "heavily weight methods for neural time series" or "down-weight fMRI-only papers"—are a form of scoping context to the minimum. They tell the model which dimensions of relevance matter and which to deprioritize, preventing it from spending attention on scoring criteria that are irrelevant to your goals. A generic relevance prompt would force the model to infer your priorities from the narrative alone; the calibration rules make those priorities explicit and unambiguous.
One principle from the Class 10 framework that tocify does not implement well is instrumentation. The original pipeline runs, commits a digest, and provides no telemetry: you cannot see how many tokens each batch consumed, which papers the model found hardest to score, or whether the pre-filter is too aggressive (discarding relevant papers) or too permissive (letting irrelevant ones through). If you wanted to optimize the system—tuning the MIN_SCORE_READ threshold, adjusting the batch size, or refining the keyword list—you would be working blind. Adding even basic logging (token counts per batch, score distributions, pre-filter pass rates) would transform tocify from a workflow you run into one you can reason about and improve.
What about the GitHub Actions schedule itself? The weekly-digest.yml file that triggers the pipeline every Monday morning is an instance of what the agentic AI community calls a proactive agent: a system that operates on a schedule without human initiation, monitoring an information environment and delivering results when they are ready. You did not need to remember to check journal tables of contents; the agent did it for you while you slept. This is the same category of automation that commercial AI productivity tools now market as "AI that works for you in the background," except we built this in February from an open-source repository, and customized it for our own research domain.
Taking It Further with Delivery to Your Inbox
The version of tocify in my fork (https://github.com/labarba/tocify)  extends the original workflow in a direction worth noting: instead of committing a Markdown file back to the repository (where you would have to remember to go read it), the enhanced pipeline generates a polished, responsive HTML email and delivers the digest directly to my inbox. This seemingly small change has an outsized effect on the system's utility. A digest that arrives in your email every Monday morning becomes part of your information diet; a digest that sits in a GitHub repository is one you forget to check by Wednesday. The delivery mechanism determines whether the automation actually changes your behavior or merely exists as a technical achievement.[1]
With the concepts you now have from Classes 7 through 10, there are several directions you could take this system that would deepen both its utility and your understanding of agentic design. None of these are assignments; they are invitations to explore on your own time, using the capabilities you have been building all semester.
Rewrite tocify as a skill. The current pipeline is a standalone Python script orchestrated by GitHub Actions. What would it look like as a Claude Code skill instead? You could write a SKILL.md that, when triggered by a phrase like "check this week's literature" or "run my journal digest," executes the same fetch-filter-score-render pipeline but within the Claude Code environment. The skill's YAML description would need to capture the trigger conditions; the body would need to specify the feeds, interests, and scoring criteria. The interesting design question is where to draw the boundary: should the skill handle everything end to end, or should it delegate the RSS fetching to a shell command and focus the LLM's attention on the scoring and summarization steps? That question is context engineering in miniature.
Add a second stage for deep reading recommendations. The current system scores papers on a 0-to-1 relevance scale and presents the top results. But relevance is not the same as importance. A paper might be highly relevant to your keywords yet incremental, while another might score lower on keyword matching but represent a methodological breakthrough you should know about. You could add a second LLM pass that takes only the top-scoring papers (say, those above 0.8) and asks the model to evaluate them on a richer set of criteria: novelty, methodological significance, potential impact on your specific research questions. This second pass would receive your full research narrative as context—not just keywords—and would produce a shorter, more opinionated list of "papers you should actually read this week" alongside the broader digest. The two-stage architecture is a natural example of model mixing: the first pass could use a lightweight model (Haiku or GPT-4o-mini) for fast, cheap triage, while the second pass uses a reasoning model (Opus or o3) for deeper evaluation.
Build a feedback loop. Right now, tocify scores papers and you either read them or you do not, but the system never learns from your choices. What if the digest included a simple mechanism—a thumbs-up link, a reply keyword, or even just a log file where you note which papers you actually opened—that fed back into the next week's scoring? Over time, the system could adjust its calibration: learning that you consistently ignore certain journals, or that you always open papers with certain methodological terms, and weighting future scores accordingly. This closes the loop between the agent's output and your behavior, turning a static pipeline into an adaptive one. Designing the feedback mechanism is an exercise in episodic memory: how do you persist what the system has learned across weekly runs, and how do you represent that accumulated knowledge in a form the LLM can use during scoring?
Monitor something other than journal feeds. The tocify architecture—fetch, filter, score, deliver—is general-purpose. The inputs do not have to be RSS feeds from academic journals. You could apply the same pattern to preprint feeds, conference proceedings pages, patent databases, or even GitHub repositories in your research area. More ambitiously, you could monitor your own research outputs: a pipeline that watches a shared directory for new simulation results, runs a quick LLM-based validation or anomaly check, and alerts you when something looks unexpected. The scoring prompt would change, the feeds configuration would change, but the underlying architecture of scheduled ingestion, context-aware filtering, and structured output would remain the same. Recognizing that the pattern is transferable— independent of the specific data source—is one of the hallmarks of thinking like a systems designer rather than a tool user.
Building a Compounding Research Codebase
The tocify example discussed above was a diagnostic, not a design exercise. We took a system you already had running and read it through the vocabulary of context engineering. The natural next question is the inverse: how do you set up a research codebase from scratch, or refactor one you have inherited, so that the kinds of design decisions we identified in tocify are present by construction rather than by accident?
This is where the course turns practical in a specific sense. Most of you, if I had to guess, have never been taught software engineering in any formal way. You learned Python because a problem set required it, you learned MATLAB because your advisor used it, and you picked up just enough of the command line to run the simulations you inherited from the senior student who graduated the year before you. If some of you admit that you do not actually use GitHub, or that you have never written a test, or that your research code lives as a single long script in a folder synced to Dropbox, you are describing conditions that are more common than uncommon in engineering doctoral programs. It is not your failing; it is a consequence of the fact that software engineering has historically been treated as a support discipline for research rather than as part of the research itself.
This concern is not universally acknowledged. Some of you may work in groups where the principal investigator regards time spent refactoring code, writing tests, or formalizing the structure of a repository as time stolen from the “real work” of producing results and writing papers. You likely inherited a working-but-illegible codebase from the student before you; you will hand something similar to the student after you; and the culture of the group treats this as normal. I sympathize with the underlying pressure: PhD theses are evaluated on scientific contribution, and a beautifully engineered codebase does not earn a publication on its own.
But something has changed, and it has changed recently enough that the old calculus is no longer correct. The practices that your PIs may have dismissed as overhead were overhead when the code would only ever be read by a human, and when every line of code cost that human several minutes of typing, thinking, and debugging. In that world, the return on investment for writing tests, maintaining a clean commit history, or organizing a repository for a future reader was real but modest: real enough that professional software teams paid the cost, modest enough that most research groups did not. Agentic coding changes this calculus fundamentally, and not for reasons of taste or professionalism. The change is mechanical.
An AI coding agent does not come to your codebase with the shared context you have accumulated over months. It does not remember the conversation you had with your advisor in October about why the pressure-Poisson solver uses one convention and the momentum solver uses another. It does not know which functions have subtle edge cases, which data files are sacred, or why the hardcoded magic number on line 247 is physically meaningful rather than a leftover from debugging. Everything that is implicit in your head—the "theory of the program" that accumulates in a researcher who has lived with their code for years—is absent from the agent's starting state. Its coding sessions begin from ignorance.
You have two options. You can re-explain the context, session after session, paying a tax every time you open a new conversation; this tax is high enough that most researchers who try agentic coding on a messy codebase conclude that the productivity gains are overstated and retreat to using AI as a glorified autocomplete. Or, you can externalize the context once into artifacts that the agent reads automatically at the start of every session, and let that investment pay dividends across every future interaction. The first option treats context engineering as a per-conversation activity; the second treats it as a property of the codebase itself.
Reframing Coding Practices for Agentic AI
This is the reframing I want you to take away from this course: 
Tests, commit histories, and repository structure are not separate from context engineering; they are context engineering at the timescale of a codebase. 
Each of the software engineering practices I will describe next maps directly onto one of the memory categories we introduced in Class 10. A pytest suite is executable semantic memory: it specifies the expected behavior of your code in a form the agent can run and verify against. A git log with descriptive commit messages is episodic memory: it tells the agent (and your future self) what was done, why, and in what order. A well-organized repository is pre-processed context: an agent landing in a clean tree with a README, a CLAUDE.md, and conventional directory names can orient itself in a minute rather than spending tokens exploring the layout. A DECISIONS.md file that records architectural choices and their rationale is static context that prevents the agent from relitigating questions you already answered.
The recent practitioner literature has begun to describe this shift explicitly. A team at the media-and-software company Every has coined the term compound engineering for the resulting style of work, defined by the principle that each unit of engineering effort should make subsequent units easier to accomplish rather than harder.[2] Birgitta Böckeler, a distinguished engineer at Thoughtworks, has written about what she calls AI-friendly codebase design, observing that the ability of an agent to read and search your code is itself a form of context interface whose quality depends on how the code is organized.[3] Patrick Debois, widely credited with originating the DevOps movement, frames the same idea as a context flywheel: the cycle by which better context produces better agent output, which in turn generates better signals about where the context needs improvement.[4]
These are three labels for the same underlying observation. When you invest in the structure of your research codebase—tests, clean commits, clear organization, explicit decision records—you are not merely enforcing code hygiene; you are building a compounding asset. Each contribution increases the leverage you have for the next one. Without this investment, each session with an AI agent is isolated, and the productivity gains that vendors advertise never actually materialize in your workflow. With this investment, the gains compound the way interest does: slowly at first, then unmistakably.
Next, we’ll discuss the three practices that I find most valuable for a research codebase: 
1. automated testing with pytest, 
2. version control with git and GitHub, and 
3. deliberate repository structure. 
I am aware that you do not all start from the same place. Some of you may have been using git for years; others have never made a commit. Some of you have written extensive test suites; others have never written an assertion. To make the session useful for both groups, the two background boxes that follow give you what you need to follow the hands-on portion if these are new tools for you. Skip whichever you already know.
Background: A Short Introduction to Version Control (Git and GitHub)
Skip this box if you are already comfortable with git commit, git push, and pull requests.
Version control is a category of tool that keeps a complete history of changes to a set of files, lets you recover any past state, and provides a structured way for multiple people to work on the same files without overwriting each other. For research software, version control replaces the folder-of-zipped-copies approach (thesis_v3_final_REAL_final2.py) with a disciplined record of what changed, when, and why.
Git is the version-control system written by Linus Torvalds in 2005 for Linux kernel development and now the near-universal choice across scientific and industrial software. Git runs locally on your machine; a repository is a directory whose contents are tracked by git, and a commit is a snapshot of the state of that directory at a given moment, annotated with a message describing the change. Commits form a chain; git log shows the chain in reverse chronological order, and any past commit can be restored with git checkout. A branch is a parallel line of commits, useful for experimenting with a change without disturbing your main line of work; a merge folds the work on one branch back into another when you are satisfied with it.
GitHub is a web service that hosts git repositories and adds collaboration features on top of them: a browsable web interface, issue tracking, pull-request-based code review, and the ability to run automated workflows (which you saw in Class 5 with GitHub Actions and tocify). GitHub is not the same as git; git works perfectly without any remote server, and there are alternative hosting services such as GitLab and Bitbucket. But because most of the open-source research software ecosystem lives on GitHub, and because the platform's academic tier is generous, GitHub is the pragmatic default for graduate students.
A minimal workflow looks like this. In a project directory, you run git init once to create the repository. You then work normally, editing files. When you reach a state worth preserving, run git add . to stage all changes and git commit -m "description of change" to record a snapshot. To back up your work and share it, create an empty repository on GitHub, then connect your local repository to it with git remote add origin <URL> and upload your commits with git push. From then on, git push uploads new commits and git pull downloads any that a collaborator has pushed. For a solo graduate student with no collaborators, that short list is enough to use git productively.
Three habits separate token use of version control from the real thing: commit often (every time a small piece of work reaches a sensible stopping point, not just at the end of the day); write commit messages that explain why rather than what (the diff already shows what changed); and learn to read git diff and git log fluently, because these are the primary windows into your project's own history.
Background: A Short Introduction to Automated Testing (pytest)
Skip this box if you have written and run a pytest test suite.
An automated test is code that verifies the behavior of other code. Rather than running your simulation, inspecting the output by eye, and deciding whether it looks right, you write a small separate function that runs a specific piece of your code on known inputs and checks that the output matches what you expect. If the check passes, the test runs silently; if it fails, the test framework tells you which expectation was violated. Because tests are themselves code, you can run hundreds of them in seconds, every time you make a change.
The value of tests is not that they catch the bugs you already know about; the value is that they catch the bugs you introduce later, when you modify code and unintentionally break something that used to work. This kind of bug—a regression—is the single most common way that research code produces silently wrong results, because the obvious symptoms are absent: your simulation still runs, it still produces plots, the plots still look plausible, but a numerical answer has subtly shifted. A test suite catches regressions the moment they occur; the alternative is discovering them six months later, in a manuscript revision, or worse, after publication.
pytest is the de facto standard testing framework for Python. You install it with pip install pytest. To write a test, create a file whose name begins with test_ (for example, test_solver.py) and define functions whose names also begin with test_. Inside each function, use Python's assert statement to check conditions. A trivial example:
python:
# test_statistics.py
import numpy as np
import pytest
from my_analysis import running_mean


def test_running_mean_reduces_length():
    data = np.array([1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0])
    result = running_mean(data, window=3)
    assert len(result) == 3  # N - window + 1


def test_running_mean_constant_signal():
    data = np.full(10, 7.5)
    result = running_mean(data, window=4)
    np.testing.assert_allclose(result, 7.5)


def test_running_mean_window_larger_than_data_raises():
    data = np.array([1.0, 2.0, 3.0])
    with pytest.raises(ValueError):
        running_mean(data, window=5)
Running pytest from the project directory finds all files matching test_*.py, runs all functions inside them whose names match test_*, and reports how many passed and failed. That is the whole interface, on the first day.
The practical question for research code is what to test. A productive starting point is the characterization test: for a function that currently works (even if you do not fully trust it), write a test that captures its current behavior on a specific input. Run the function, copy the output into an assert statement, and commit. The test now acts as a tripwire: if any future change alters that behavior, you will find out immediately. Characterization tests are particularly valuable before a refactoring effort, because they let you rearrange the internals of a function with confidence that the external behavior has not drifted. We will use this pattern explicitly in the hands-on portion of the class.
A realistic research-code test suite is not comprehensive; it does not need to be. What it does need is coverage of the parts of the code you are most afraid to modify, the parts whose correctness is essential to your scientific claims, and any function whose behavior has surprised you in the past. Thirty tests of the right thirty functions is worth more than three hundred tests of trivial accessors.
With those foundations in place, we can now look at the three practices that convert a research codebase from a fragile, personal artifact into a compounding asset, and we can do the hands-on work on a system you already know well: your own fork of tocify.
Three Practices AI Makes Accessible
The three practices covered in this section—automated testing, disciplined version control, and deliberate repository structure—are not new. Software engineers have advocated for them for decades, and entire sub-disciplines have grown up around each one. What is new is that agentic AI tools have collapsed the cost that historically kept research groups from adopting them.
Writing the first test used to mean learning a framework, inventing test cases, thinking through edge conditions, and committing to maintain the suite for the life of the project; now you ask an agent to draft tests for an existing function and a few seconds later you have a starting point you can edit. Writing disciplined commits used to mean typing thoughtful prose every few minutes while in the middle of technical work; now the agent reads your diff and proposes a message that you accept, refine, or reject. Setting up a clean repository structure used to be a half-day of fiddling with directory trees and configuration files; now a single prompt generates the scaffolding and you adjust from there.
The practices still pay for themselves through compounding returns, as we argued above. What has changed is that the entry cost is no longer high enough to explain away. For a research group whose primary product is scientific insight rather than software, the decision to adopt these practices is finally unambiguous: the cost is negligible, and the return is a codebase that accumulates rather than dissipates value across the years of a PhD.
Tests as Executable Specifications
A pytest suite is, in the vocabulary of Class 10, executable semantic memory. It is a record of what your code is supposed to do, stored in a form that can be verified automatically. When you run pytest and see 47 tests pass, you have not merely confirmed that the code runs; you have confirmed that 47 specific expectations about its behavior still hold. An AI agent working in your codebase can run the same command and read the same result. The test suite is therefore not just for you; it is a feedback signal the agent uses to check its own work.
The single most useful pattern for research code is the characterization test: a test that captures the current behavior of a function you already trust, without attempting to prove that the behavior is theoretically correct. Suppose you have a function that computes a vorticity field from velocity components, and you know it produces the right answer on the cases you have run. Before you refactor it, before you ask an agent to refactor it, before you port it to a new library, before you optimize it, you feed it a specific input, capture its output, and wrap the pair in an assertion:
python:
# test_vorticity.py
import numpy as np
from my_solver import compute_vorticity


def test_compute_vorticity_uniform_shear():
    u = np.array([[0.0, 1.0, 2.0],
                  [0.0, 1.0, 2.0],
                  [0.0, 1.0, 2.0]])
    v = np.zeros_like(u)
    omega = compute_vorticity(u, v, dx=1.0, dy=1.0)
    expected = np.full_like(u, -1.0)  # captured from a trusted run
    np.testing.assert_allclose(omega, expected, atol=1e-12)
The test does not prove that compute_vorticity is correct; it proves that whatever the function produced on the day you wrote the test, it will continue to produce. That is the guarantee you need when an agent is about to rewrite the function's internals. If the refactored version silently changes a sign convention or drops a factor of two, the test fails immediately and the regression surfaces before it contaminates your results.
The interaction with an AI coding agent is straightforward: you ask it to write characterization tests for a function before you ask it to do anything else. A useful prompt is something like "write pytest characterization tests for compute_vorticity using the function's current behavior as ground truth, covering at least a uniform-shear case, a pure-rotation case, and a zero-velocity case." The agent drafts the tests; you run them to confirm they pass on the current code; then you unleash the agent on whatever refactoring, optimization, or restructuring you wanted done. If it breaks something, the tests tell you which invariant it violated. If it touches nothing that matters, the tests pass silently and you proceed with confidence.
The compounding payoff is this: every test you add is a permanent tripwire. Six months from now, when a collaborator or an agent modifies code near a sensitive function, the test catches the regression the moment it is introduced. A research codebase with fifty well-chosen characterization tests is a fundamentally different animal from one with none: the first can be modified freely, the second cannot be modified at all without risk.
Git History as Project Memory
Your git log is episodic memory for your project: an ordered record of what happened, when, and—if you write the messages well—why. An AI agent starting a new session in your repository can run git log --oneline -20 and reconstruct, in a few hundred tokens, the recent trajectory of the work: what feature was added last week, which bug was fixed yesterday, what refactoring is currently in progress. No other source of context is as dense, as current, or as cheap to consult.
This only works if the log is readable. A log full of entries like "update," "fix," "more changes," and "asdf" is effectively noise. A log with messages that explain the why of each change is a running commentary on the evolution of the project, usable by both your future self and any agent that enters the repository.
The Conventional Commits specification is a lightweight convention that has become the de facto standard across the open-source ecosystem.[5] It asks you to prefix each commit message with a type—feat for a new feature, fix for a bug fix, refactor for a restructuring that does not change behavior, docs for documentation changes, test for test additions, chore for maintenance—followed by a short imperative summary and, optionally, a longer explanatory body. The entire specification fits on one page, and adopting it costs nothing beyond the mental discipline of classifying each commit as you make it.
The difference it makes is visible in the log. Compare two entries recording the same change:
a1b2c3d update solver
or:
a1b2c3d fix(solver): correct sign of Coriolis term in v-momentum equation


The previous implementation had a sign error in the Coriolis term
that canceled only in the rotating-frame test case. Discovered
when the non-rotating limit failed to reproduce Stommel (1948).
The first entry tells you nothing; the second tells you what was wrong, what was fixed, how the error went undetected, and which reference case exposed it. If in eighteen months you open the log to investigate a suspicious result, the second entry may save you two weeks of bisecting.
Writing messages at this level of care is tedious, and historically that is why most graduate students never did it. An AI coding agent removes the tedium almost entirely. After staging your changes, you ask Claude Code to "write a Conventional Commits message for the staged diff, explaining why not just what." The agent reads the diff—which it can do far more quickly than you can describe the change—and produces a draft that you review, edit, and commit. The agent has no temptation to abbreviate because it is tired; it produces the same careful message at 9:00 a.m. as at 11:00 p.m. Your role shifts from writing the message to verifying that it accurately describes the change.
The compounding payoff, again, is durability. Every well-written commit is a permanent annotation on the history of your project. You are not writing messages for yourself in the next five minutes; you are writing them for yourself in the next five years, and for every agent that will ever run git log in this repository.
Repository Structure for Humans and Agents
The physical layout of your repository is itself context, pre-processed and available to any agent that reads the directory tree. An agent landing in a project with a clear structure spends almost no tokens figuring out where things are; an agent landing in a dumping ground spends most of its attention budget just exploring. This is the concrete meaning of what Birgitta Böckeler has called AI-friendly codebase design: the shape of your repository is a design choice that affects the quality of every subsequent agent interaction.
A research repository that is ready for both human and agent readers has a predictable skeleton at the top level. At the root, you should find a README.md describing what the project is and how to run it; a CLAUDE.md or AGENTS.md with project-specific conventions, as introduced in Class 7; a dependency specification such as pyproject.toml or requirements.txt; a LICENSE file if you intend to share the code; a CHANGELOG.md summarizing human-visible changes across versions; and, optionally but valuably, a DECISIONS.md file recording the reasoning behind consequential design choices. Source code lives under src/ or in a named package directory; tests live under tests/; runnable examples live under examples/; documentation source lives under docs/; data, if it lives in the repository at all, lives under data/, though large datasets usually belong elsewhere with only a pointer committed to the repository.
A minimal but complete example looks like this:
my-research-project/
├── README.md
├── CLAUDE.md
├── LICENSE
├── CHANGELOG.md
├── DECISIONS.md
├── pyproject.toml
├── src/
│   └── my_project/
│       ├── __init__.py
│       ├── solver.py
│       └── io.py
├── tests/
│   ├── test_solver.py
│   └── test_io.py
├── examples/
│   └── lid_driven_cavity.py
└── docs/
    └── method.md
A useful test of whether your structure is adequate: could a new lab member—or an AI agent on its first session—orient themselves in under one minute by reading only the files at the root? If the README explains what the project does, the CLAUDE.md explains the conventions, and the directory names are conventional, the answer is yes. If any of these is missing, the first minute of every session is spent reconstructing context that could have been written down once.
Of the files listed above, DECISIONS.md is the one most underused in research codebases and most valuable for agentic work. The idea is borrowed from a software engineering practice called Architecture Decision Records,[6] and it is exactly what it sounds like: a running log of consequential choices and the reasoning behind them. Each entry names a decision, the context in which it was made, the alternatives considered, and the rationale for the chosen option. A single entry might read:
markdown:
## 2026-03-14: Use sparse CSR format throughout the linear solver


**Context:** Memory became the binding constraint at grids
above 512^3. Dense storage would exceed available RAM.


**Decision:** Use scipy.sparse CSR matrices for all stiffness
and mass matrices. Do not convert to dense for debugging prints.


**Alternatives considered:** COO (simpler, but slower matrix-vector
products); dense (rejected for memory reasons); JAX sparse (rejected
for dependency complexity).


**Consequences:** All solver code must tolerate sparse inputs.
Visualization utilities that currently assume dense arrays will
need .toarray() calls, documented in CLAUDE.md.
Without this record, six months from now you or your agent will look at the sparse-everywhere convention, wonder whether it was deliberate, and either change it (reintroducing the memory problem) or waste time rediscovering the reasoning. With the record, the decision is load-bearing context that anyone, human or agent, can read in thirty seconds.
The compounding payoff across all three practices is the same: each contribution raises the floor for every subsequent interaction. A well-tested, well-committed, well-structured repository is one in which an agent can work productively from its first session onward, because the context it needs has been externalized into artifacts it reads automatically. An untested, poorly committed, chaotically structured repository is one in which every agent session starts near zero, and the productivity gains of agentic coding remain perpetually just out of reach.
Hands-On: Upgrading Your tocify Fork
We will now apply the three practices to a codebase every one of you already has: your own fork of tocify. The exercise has three parts, corresponding to the three practices, and each part culminates in a commit. By the end of the hour you will have a tocify fork that has tests, structured commits, and clearer repository conventions than it did when you walked in, and you will have practiced the pattern you should apply to your own research code afterward.
Before you begin, you need a local working copy of your tocify fork. If you already have one from earlier experimentation, make sure it is cloned from your fork (not the original voytek/tocify) and skip to the next paragraph. If you do not—and most of you will not, because the Class 5 exercises were done entirely through the GitHub web interface—you need to clone your fork now.
From the command line, navigate to wherever you keep your code and run:
git clone https://github.com/YOUR-USERNAME/tocify.git
cd tocify
replacing YOUR-USERNAME with your GitHub username. This creates a local directory containing every file in your fork and configures origin to point at your fork on GitHub, which is what we want.[7] Verify this with git remote -v; both fetch and push URLs should reference your own username, not voytek. We will not be pulling from or pushing to the upstream repository during this class; everything we do will happen in your fork.
Once you have a local working copy, open a terminal in the repository root and run claude to start a Claude Code session. Claude will automatically read any CLAUDE.md at the root, though in the default tocify fork there is not yet one to read. That absence is itself a clue about where the hour is headed. (You can also use Codex, Gemini CLI, or GitHub Copilot CLI for this exercise.)
Exercise 1: Characterization Tests for keyword_prefilter()
The first exercise targets keyword_prefilter() in digest.py, the pre-processing function we identified in the retrospective as an instance of pre-processing context for consumption. It is a good candidate for our first test suite for three reasons: it is pure (its output depends only on its inputs, not on the network or the filesystem), its behavior is easy to articulate ("keep items whose title or abstract contains at least one keyword"), and it sits upstream of the expensive LLM calls, which means a regression here would corrupt everything downstream.
The pattern is the one introduced in the pytest background box: write characterization tests that capture the function's current behavior before modifying anything. The point is not to prove keyword_prefilter() is correct in some absolute sense; the point is to wrap it in a tripwire so that any later change—by you, by a collaborator, or by an agent—immediately surfaces if the behavior drifts.
Ask Claude Code to do this for you. A prompt that works well:
Read digest.py and identify the keyword_prefilter() function. Write pytest characterization tests for it in a new file tests/test_keyword_prefilter.py. Cover at least these cases: (1) a paper whose title matches a keyword passes the filter; (2) a paper whose abstract matches a keyword passes the filter; (3) a paper matching no keywords is rejected; (4) matching is case-insensitive; (5) the empty-input case returns an empty list. Use the function's current behavior as ground truth. Do not modify digest.py.
The agent will read the function, draft the tests, and write them to disk. Before accepting the output, read the tests yourself. You are looking for three things. Do they actually exercise the cases the prompt asked for? Do they pass on the current code (install pytest with pip install pytest if you have not already, then run pytest tests/ to find out)? And do any of them encode assumptions that surprise you—cases where the function's actual behavior differs from what you would have expected?
That third question is an intellectually interesting one. Characterization tests often surface behavior the author did not fully intend. If, for instance, the current keyword_prefilter() treats multi-word keywords in a way you had not noticed, the test will freeze that behavior into the specification and force you to decide whether it is desirable. This is the moment when a test suite stops being busywork and starts being a tool for thinking.
Once the tests pass, you will commit them. We will write the commit message carefully in the next exercise.
Exercise 2: A Conventional Commit, AI-Drafted
You have a set of new, passing tests staged for commit. Rather than typing git commit -m "added tests" and moving on, we will use this commit as the occasion to adopt the Conventional Commits discipline introduced above.
Stage the new test file with git add tests/test_keyword_prefilter.py. Then ask Claude Code:
Review the staged diff with git diff --staged. Write a Conventional Commits message for this change. Use the test type since the change adds tests without modifying behavior. Explain why these tests were added, not just that they were added; reference the characterization-test pattern and the role of keyword_prefilter() in the pipeline's pre-processing step.
The agent will read the staged diff—usually in a single tool call—and propose a message. A well-drafted example might read something like:
test(digest): add characterization tests for keyword_prefilter


Captures current behavior of the pre-filter stage so that future
changes to the matching logic or keyword-handling rules surface
immediately as regressions. Covers title matches, abstract matches,
case-insensitivity, empty input, and the no-match case.


Motivated by the Class 11 retrospective, which identified
keyword_prefilter() as an implementation of the "pre-process
context for consumption" principle: regressions here would
corrupt every downstream LLM scoring call.
Read the message before accepting it. Two things are worth checking. First, does the type:scope prefix correctly describe the change? A test-only commit should use test, a bug fix should use fix, a behavior-preserving restructure should use refactor, and a new feature should use feat. Second, does the body explain why the change was made? A commit message that only restates the diff is wasted context; one that explains motivation is durable project memory.
Edit the message if anything is off (the agent will draft it, but you own it) and commit.
Run git log --oneline -5 and look at what you have just produced. This is the first entry in a log that could, with sustained discipline, become a legible history of the project. Compare it mentally to the log of whatever research codebase you currently work in.
Exercise 3: Adding a CLAUDE.md and a DECISIONS.md
The third exercise addresses the structural gap we already noted: tocify, in its original form, has no instruction file for coding agents. An agent entering the repository has to reconstruct the project's purpose and conventions from the code itself every time. We will fix this.
Ask Claude Code:
Read the repository root and the contents of digest.py, interests.md, prompt.txt, and .github/workflows/weekly-digest.yml. Draft a CLAUDE.md for this project. It should describe: what the project does in one paragraph; the tech stack (Python version, key dependencies); the project structure (which file does what); the conventions you can infer (how configuration is handled, where secrets live, how the pipeline is triggered); and any important gotchas (for example, the fact that interests.md is parsed for keywords and requires a specific format). Keep the total length under 50 lines.
Review the draft. Two failure modes are common. The agent may include too much detail—rewriting the README rather than providing agent-specific guidance—in which case ask it to trim. Or it may miss conventions that are obvious to you but invisible in the code, in which case edit the draft by hand to add them. This back-and-forth is the normal process of writing a CLAUDE.md; the agent produces the scaffolding, and you contribute the tacit knowledge that only the maintainer possesses.
Once the CLAUDE.md is in place, create a DECISIONS.md as well. You do not need to reconstruct every decision the original author made; you need exactly one entry, as a seed for the habit. A natural first entry, given the retrospective at the start of class, is the choice to batch LLM calls rather than send all pre-filtered papers at once. Ask Claude Code:
Create a DECISIONS.md at the repository root. Add one entry documenting the decision to process papers in batches of 50 rather than sending all pre-filtered papers to the LLM in a single call. Follow the Architecture Decision Record format: context, decision, alternatives considered, consequences. Infer the reasoning from the retrospective framing: attention-budget management in long contexts, the lost-in-the-middle phenomenon, and per-call cost control.
Read the result. Edit where the reasoning is wrong or incomplete; this is your decision record, even if the agent drafted it. Then stage both files and commit them with an AI-drafted Conventional Commits message, as in Exercise 2. A docs type is appropriate here since these are documentation changes rather than behavior changes.
At the end of this exercise, your tocify fork now contains: a passing test suite, a commit history with at least two carefully written Conventional Commits, a CLAUDE.md that will be read at the start of every future agent session, and a DECISIONS.md with its first entry. You have not changed a single line of behavior, and your fork is nonetheless a meaningfully more capable environment for agentic work than it was an hour ago.
Extension: The Instrumentation Gap
Students who finish the three core exercises early have a natural next step. In the retrospective we identified instrumentation as the one principle from Class 10 that tocify does not implement: the pipeline runs, commits a digest, and provides no telemetry. You cannot see how many tokens each batch consumed, which papers were hardest to score, or whether the pre-filter is too aggressive or too permissive.
Closing that gap is a small but real piece of engineering, and it is the kind of task agentic coding handles well. Ask Claude Code:
Add lightweight instrumentation to digest.py. Before and after each batch's OpenAI call, log: the number of papers in the batch, the approximate input token count (a rough estimate is fine), the wall-clock time the call took, and the distribution of scores returned. Write the log entries to a JSON-lines file in logs/, one entry per batch, with a timestamp. Do not change the scoring behavior itself. Add a test that confirms the log file is created and contains the expected fields after a mocked pipeline run.
The exercise is deliberately open-ended; there are a half-dozen reasonable ways to structure the logging, and the agent will propose one you can accept or redirect. The point is not a specific implementation but the experience of adding observability to a system that did not have it, using the practices you just exercised: test first, commit carefully, document the decision if it is consequential.
What to Take Away
The hands-on session was not primarily about tocify. Tocify is a convenient common substrate—small, familiar, and the same across all of your forks—on which to practice a pattern you will apply to your own research code repeatedly over the next several years. The pattern is: test before you change, commit as if someone else will read the log, and externalize context into files the agent reads automatically. Each of those habits costs a few minutes in the flow of work and compounds across months.
As exercise, pick one repository of your own—your thesis code, a coursework project, a scaffolded placeholder if you do not yet have research code—and apply the same three exercises to it. You do not need comprehensive coverage; you need one characterization test, one Conventional Commits message, and one CLAUDE.md. That is the seed. Let the habit grow from there.
Apply This to Code You Care About
The exercises you just completed on tocify were deliberately low-stakes. Your fork is a working system but not one whose scientific results you will defend in your dissertation, and the specific tests and decision records we added have modest intrinsic value. The value was in the rehearsal: you practiced writing characterization tests before modifying code behavior, drafting Conventional Commits messages with an agent, and externalizing project context into files an agent reads automatically. Those patterns transfer directly to code that does matter.
Between now and the end of the semester, I want you to apply the same three-exercise sequence to one repository of your own. The specific choice is yours, and it depends on where you are in your program. Students working on a thesis codebase should use that one; the payoff is largest where you will spend the most time over the next few years. Students whose research code is currently a single script in a folder should scaffold that script into a minimal repository first, then apply the exercises. Master's students who do not yet have a research project should use a coursework repository, a side project, or a deliberately scaffolded placeholder around a topic you expect to work on—the habit is what matters, not the specific codebase. The point is to do the transfer while the pattern is fresh, on code whose structure you understand well enough to evaluate whether the agent's suggestions are correct.
A reasonable target is: one CLAUDE.md at the repository root, one characterization test for a function whose correctness you care about, and one Conventional Commits message that explains why rather than what. That is enough to start.
It is worth naming, as we close the coding arc of this course, what we have not been doing. Over the past year, the phrase vibe coding—coined by Andrej Karpathy in February 2025—has come to describe a style of AI-assisted development in which the human gives the agent a high-level intent, accepts whatever it produces, and iterates by describing what feels off until the output feels right. It has a legitimate place: for throwaway scripts, rapid prototypes, and exploratory sketches where correctness is negotiable and the code will never be read again, vibe coding is efficient and even liberating. But it is not what research code is. Research code carries the correctness of your scientific claims; a sign error that "felt right" and passed visual inspection can invalidate a thesis chapter. The practices in this class—characterization tests before refactoring, commit messages that explain the reasoning, decision records that preserve the why, repository structures that externalize context—are the opposite of vibe coding in an important sense. They are deliberate rather than improvisational, they assume the code will be read many times by both humans and agents, and they treat the accumulated artifacts of the project (tests, logs, decision records) as first-class outputs rather than incidental scaffolding. Agentic coding for research is not vibe coding with bigger models; it is context engineering at the timescale of a codebase, which is a different discipline with a different payoff.
The exercises suggested above are not a graded assignment. Consider them a gift to your future self, and to whichever graduate student inherits your code after you graduate.






________________
[1] Thanks to Adam Karp (and Claude Code) for this enhancement.
[2] Kieran Klaassen, "Compound Engineering: How Every Codes With Agents," Every, December 2025, https://every.to/chain-of-thought/compound-engineering-how-every-codes-with-agents. An extended methodology is available at https://every.to/guides/compound-engineering. 
[3] Birgitta Böckeler, "Context Engineering for Coding Agents," martinfowler.com, February 2026, https://martinfowler.com/articles/exploring-gen-ai/context-engineering-coding-agents.html.
[4] Patrick Debois, "The Context Flywheel: Why the Best AI Coding Teams Will Win on Context," Tessl Blog, Feb. 2026, https://tessl.io/blog/the-context-flywheel-why-the-best-ai-coding-teams-will-win-on-context/ 
[5] The Conventional Commits specification, version 1.0.0: https://www.conventionalcommits.org/. The convention originated in the Angular.js project and has since been adopted across most of the open-source ecosystem. 
[6] Michael Nygard introduced the Architecture Decision Record pattern in a 2011 blog post; the community-maintained specification lives at https://adr.github.io/.
[7] If you have never cloned a repository before and would rather avoid the command line for this step, install GitHub Desktop from desktop.github.com. After signing in with your GitHub account, choose File → Clone repository, select your tocify fork from the list of your repositories, and pick a local folder. GitHub Desktop handles authentication and remote configuration for you; the resulting working copy behaves identically to one produced by git clone. You will still open a terminal in the repository root to run claude and pytest, but the clone itself requires no command-line work.