MAE 6291 – Class 9
Lorena A. Barba, March 31, 2026


Skills as Infrastructure: Evaluating, Designing, and Evolving Agent-Readable Skills
From Personal Tool to Shared Infrastructure
Last week, we showed a worked example of building a skill from scratch. We took expert knowledge that existed as video lectures, distilled it through multiple AI tools, and packaged the result as a SKILL.md file that directs how Claude Code behaves when it reviews a manuscript. You saw the YAML frontmatter, the Markdown body, the progressive disclosure mechanism, and the difference between a skill and a CLAUDE.md file. That was an example of  the mechanics for how to write a skill. Today we step back and ask a different question: what are skills becoming, and what does that mean for you as a researcher?
The answer requires a bit of timeline, because the story has moved remarkably fast. Anthropic introduced Agent Skills in early October 2025.[1] The initial release was a beta feature for Claude Code and the Claude API, with a handful of Anthropic-built skills for working with documents in Word, Excel, PowerPoint, and PDF. The concept was simple: a folder with a SKILL.md file that Claude loads dynamically to perform specialized tasks. Users could also create and upload custom skills. It was, in Anthropic's framing, like putting together an onboarding guide for a new hire, except the new hire is an AI agent.
That was less than six months ago! In the ten weeks that followed, the concept transformed. On December 9, Anthropic donated the Model Context Protocol (MCP) to the Linux Foundation, signaling its commitment to open infrastructure over proprietary lock-in. Nine days later, on December 18, Anthropic published Agent Skills as a formal open standard, with a specification and reference SDK available at https://agentskills.io.[2] The announcement came with immediate cross-industry adoption: Microsoft integrated the standard into VS Code and GitHub Copilot; Cursor, Goose, Amp, and OpenCode added support; OpenAI reportedly began testing a Skills Editor that converts Custom GPTs into the open format.[3] Partner-built skills from Atlassian, Canva, Figma, Notion, Stripe, and Zapier appeared at launch. Enterprise customers on Anthropic's Team and Enterprise plans gained centralized admin controls: the ability to provision skills organization-wide, enforce policies on which skills are available, and monitor usage across deployments.[4]
By January 2026, Anthropic published a detailed engineering blog post documenting the architecture—progressive disclosure, the three levels of skill loading, code execution integration—with worked examples showing how the same SKILL.md format scales from a 170-line writing review skill to a multi-agent research pipeline.[5] In the same month, Anthropic released Cowork, which bundles skills into a desktop agent that works on your computer, and updated the Claude for Excel and PowerPoint add-ins to share full conversation context and support skills directly.[6] Meanwhile, the community was building. Open-source repositories of skills have appeared on GitHub covering engineering, scientific computing, data analysis, academic writing, and dozens of other domains. People began sharing skills the way programmers share code libraries: studying each other's work, adapting it, discovering what makes one skill reliable and another brittle.
Today, at the end of March 2026, skills are no longer a niche feature for early adopters of Claude Code. They are an infrastructure layer. They work across Claude, ChatGPT, Copilot, Cursor, and any tool that implements the Agent Skills standard. They are provisioned by IT administrators to thousands of employees at once. They are called by AI agents far more often than by humans. And they are being built, shared, critiqued, and refined by a community that is collectively discovering—not inheriting from a manual—the best practices for making AI agents reliably useful.
That progression, from a beta feature in October to cross-industry infrastructure in March, is worth pausing on. It took the Model Context Protocol about the same amount of time to go from announcement to ubiquity; Anthropic introduced MCP in late 2024, and by mid-2025 every major AI platform supported it. Skills appear to be on a similar trajectory, and for a similar reason: they solve a real problem that no proprietary approach can solve alone. Just as MCP standardized how agents connect to external tools, the Agent Skills standard is converging on how agents acquire domain-specific expertise. The two are complementary—MCP provides secure connectivity to external software and data, while skills provide the procedural knowledge for using those tools effectively—and together they form the connective tissue of the agentic ecosystem we've been studying since the start of this course.
All of this matters for you, concretely, because the example skill we built last week and the skill(s) you'll build later (as part of an assignment) are not class exercises that expire when the semester ends. They are artifacts in a format that the entire AI industry has agreed on, that will work in whatever tools you use next year and beyond, and that will get more valuable as you refine them. But to build good ones—and to recognize bad ones when you encounter them—you need to understand not just the format but the design principles that have emerged from these first six months of collective learning.
Four shifts that changed what skills are
Nate Jones, a practitioner and educator who has been building with skills since October, recently published a useful framework for understanding how the concept has evolved.[7] He identifies four shifts, and each one has direct implications for how you should think about skills as engineering researchers.
The first shift is from personal configuration to organizational infrastructure. Last October, a skill was something you built for yourself: a personal productivity tool. You typed in the instructions, you saved the file, you used it. That's still a perfectly valid use case, and it's where most people will start. But the center of gravity has moved. Enterprise administrators are now rolling out curated skills libraries across entire organizations. Brand voice, formatting standards, approved templates, compliance checklists, these are all being packaged as skills and provisioned to every employee's AI tools from a central dashboard. The methodology of an AI-forward organization is migrating from training manuals and institutional memory into agent-readable, version-controlled files.
For a research lab, the analogy is immediate. Your advisor's expectations for figure formatting, the group's conventions for simulation setup, the writing standards that every manuscript from your lab should follow, these are all institutional knowledge that currently lives in someone's head, in a lab wiki nobody updates, or in a thesis from three years ago that new students may or may not find. Packaging that knowledge as a skill means that every AI agent working in your lab's repositories can apply those conventions automatically. When a new student joins the group, the skills are already there. The methodology persists independently of any one person's presence.
The second shift is from human-called to agent-called. In October, humans were the primary invokers of skills. You would ask Claude to review your writing, Claude would match your request to the manuscript-review skill's description, load the instructions, and proceed. The human was in the loop at the moment of invocation, and could correct drift immediately. That pattern still works, and it's how we used skills in the Class 8 worked example.
But increasingly, the primary callers of skills are agents, not humans. An agent running a multi-step workflow might invoke dozens of skills over the course of a single run, selecting the right skill for each sub-task based on the description field. No human is present at each invocation to verify the match or correct errors. This changes the stakes of skill design in a fundamental way. When a human calls a skill and the output isn't quite right, the human notices and adjusts. When an agent calls a skill and the output is subtly wrong, that error propagates downstream—into the next skill invocation, the next sub-agent's input, the next step of the pipeline—with no recovery loop. We'll explore multi-agent pipelines later, but the design implication is relevant now: skills need to be written for an audience of agents, not just an audience of humans.
What does "writing for agents" mean in practice? It means the description field is not a label for your convenience; it's a routing signal that determines whether the skill fires in the right context. It means the output specification is not a rough guideline; it's a contract that downstream consumers depend on. And it means edge cases you might handle through common sense as a human reader need to be written down explicitly, because the agent has no common sense to fall back on. We'll come back to each of these design principles in the next section.
The third shift is from developer-only tool to cross-domain infrastructure. When skills launched, they lived in the terminal. You created them from the command line, you stored them in .claude/skills/ directories, and you invoked them through Claude Code. The natural audience was software developers. This perception persists—many people still associate skills with coding workflows—but it no longer reflects reality.
Skills now work in Claude.ai's web interface (where you can upload them as Project Knowledge), in Claude Desktop, in Cowork, in the Claude for Excel and PowerPoint add-ins, and through the Claude API. Because they follow an open standard, they also work in ChatGPT (via OpenAI's adoption), in VS Code with GitHub Copilot, in Cursor, and in other tools. A skill that encodes your lab's data analysis methodology can be used by a terminal agent running in your project directory, by a colleague who opens Claude.ai and uploads the same SKILL.md, or by an enterprise deployment that provides the skill to every analyst in a department. The format is the same; the entry points vary.
This cross-platform portability is why I've been emphasizing throughout this course that skills are not a Claude Code feature; they are an industry standard. The investment you make in learning to write and evaluate skills transfers to whatever AI tools you use next, in the same way that learning to write clear documentation transfers regardless of which programming language you're working in.
The fourth shift is from closed-source instinct to community discovery. This one is perhaps the most interesting, and the most relevant to your situation as researchers.
The instinct in most competitive environments is to keep your best practices proprietary. If you've figured out a reliable process for something—how to analyze a dataset, how to structure a proposal, how to format figures for a specific journal—conventional wisdom says that's your competitive advantage, and you should protect it. But the skills community has largely moved in the opposite direction. People are sharing skills openly, studying each other's implementations, and iterating collectively on design patterns. Jones describes it vividly: people are trading skills like baseball cards.
Why? Because with skills, as with many AI practices, the best practices are just being discovered, not known. There’s no official manual for how to write an effective SKILL.md. When Anthropic introduced skills in October, the format was simple—a folder with a Markdown file—but nobody had years of experience with what makes one skill reliable and another brittle. The only way to learn was to build, share, test, compare, and refine. That's a community activity by nature, and the communities that learn fastest are those that share the most.
This is not a new phenomenon in research. Open-source scientific software follows the same dynamic. The groups that open-source their solvers, their analysis pipelines, and their visualization tools don't lose competitive advantage; they gain collaborators, catch bugs faster, build reputations, and accelerate their own work by receiving improvements from others. The same logic applies to skills. A lab that publishes its simulation-postprocessing skill on GitHub is likely to receive pull requests that catch edge cases the original authors missed, and the improved skill benefits everyone who uses it, including the lab that wrote it.
For you as graduate students, there's an additional dimension. In academia, the currency of reputation is published contribution. Open-sourcing a well-crafted, domain-specific skill—a figure-formatting standard for AIAA journals, a convergence-analysis protocol for finite volume solvers, a mesh-quality evaluator for OpenFOAM—is a contribution that establishes your expertise in a visible, reusable way. It functions as a portfolio piece that demonstrates both domain knowledge and AI literacy. 
Skills persist and improve
There's one more argument worth making explicit before we turn to design principles, because it's the argument for why skills deserve a dedicated class session—and a dedicated assignment—rather than being treated as a footnote to agentic coding.
Think about how most people interact with AI tools. They write a prompt, get a result, maybe refine the prompt a few times, and eventually get something good enough. Then the conversation ends. The next time they need to do the same kind of task, they either remember roughly what they typed before and re-create it from memory, or they dig through a prompt library looking for the right one, or they just start over. The knowledge about what worked—the precise phrasing, the edge cases they addressed, the examples they included—evaporates when the conversation closes.
Skills change this. When you package your best prompt into a SKILL.md file, it persists. When you discover an edge case the skill doesn't handle—maybe your figure-formatting skill doesn't account for subplots, or your writing-review skill doesn't handle equations well—you update the file, and the improvement persists for every future invocation. Over weeks and months, the skill gets better. It accumulates the lessons of every session in which you used it and noticed something that could be improved.
This effect compounds over time. Each refinement makes the next session more productive. A skill you build in your first year of graduate school and refine throughout your program becomes an increasingly powerful tool, not just for you, but for anyone in your group who uses it. Prompts, in contrast, don't compound in this way. They are ephemeral by nature. Excellent prompting is still a valuable skill (the human kind), but prompts are the raw material. Skills are the durable product you build from that material, and their value grows with time and attention.
In the next assignment, you will create a reusable skill: do not think of it as a homework problem to be completed and forgotten. Think of it as the seed of a tool that, if you maintain and refine it, becomes part of your research infrastructure, an encoded record of your best practices that AI agents can follow reliably, and that your successors in the lab can inherit and build on. You can start simple: fifty lines is fine. Then invest in iteration over time to add value to your team.
Anatomy of Agent-First Skill Design
We’ve talked about the mechanics of the SKILL.md format: where skills live, what the YAML frontmatter does, what goes in the Markdown body, and how all of it came together in the manuscript-review skill we built from Sainani's writing course. That gave you the what. Today we discuss the how: the design principles that separate a skill that works in a classroom demonstration from a skill that works reliably in a research pipeline, called by an agent, with no human watching.
The distinction matters because writing a SKILL.md is easy. Writing one that triggers correctly, produces predictable output, handles edge cases, and composes with other skills in a multi-step workflow—that requires deliberate design. The community has spent six months discovering what works and what doesn't, often through frustrating trial and error. What follows is a distillation of those lessons, organized around the two parts of every skill: the description field and the methodology body.
The description field: “where skills go to die”
Bibek Poudel, an AI/ML engineer who published a detailed practical guide to the SKILL.md pattern in February 2026,[8] opens with a line that captures six months of community experience in a single sentence: 
"If your skill does not trigger, it is almost never the instructions. It is the description.”
This is the single most important lesson of skill design, and it's the one that takes the longest to internalize because it feels backwards. When something goes wrong with a skill, the instinct is to debug the instructions: to rewrite the methodology, add more detail, restructure the steps. But in most cases the instructions were never the problem. The problem was that the agent never loaded them in the first place, because the description didn't match the user's (or the calling agent's) request closely enough to trigger activation.
Recall how progressive disclosure works. At the start of a session, Claude Code reads only the YAML frontmatter—the name and description of every installed skill. The full Markdown body stays on disk, unread, costing zero tokens. When you make a request, the agent compares your intent against those descriptions. If it determines a skill is relevant, then it loads the body into context. If no description matches, no skill is loaded, and the agent proceeds with its general knowledge. The description is the gatekeeper. Get it wrong and the rest of the skill might as well not exist.
So what makes a description work? The agentskills.io specification says a description can be up to 1,024 characters and must describe both what the skill does and when to use it. But that's the mechanical constraint. The design principle is more specific: a good description has a particular internal structure. It states what the skill does (the capability), then states the conditions under which it should activate (the trigger), using the actual phrases that a user or calling agent would naturally use.
Here is the anatomy of a bad description, a mediocre one, and a good one, adapted from Poudel's examples but reframed for a research context:
Bad: description: Helps with mesh analysis.
This is too diffuse. "Helps with" could mean anything. "Mesh analysis" could be mesh generation, mesh quality assessment, mesh convergence study, or mesh visualization. The agent has no basis for confident matching, so it either triggers on everything tangentially related to meshes (producing false positives) or fails to trigger when you actually need it (producing false negatives). In practice, Anthropic's guidance says skills tend to under-trigger rather than over-trigger, so vague descriptions mostly produce false negatives: the skill simply never fires.
Mediocre: description: Performs comprehensive mesh quality assessment with detailed metrics reporting for finite element and finite volume simulations.
This is better: it names what the skill does with some specificity. But it describes what without describing when. The agent knows this skill exists, but it doesn't know what kind of request should activate it. A user saying "check my mesh" or "is this mesh good enough to run?" is not using any of the words in this description.
Good:
description: >
  Evaluates mesh quality for FEA and CFD simulations by computing
  aspect ratio, skewness, orthogonality, and element count metrics.
  Use when asked to "check my mesh," "assess mesh quality,"
  "is this mesh good enough," "evaluate the grid," or "run mesh
  diagnostics." Produces a structured report with pass/fail thresholds
  and refinement recommendations. Do NOT use for mesh generation
  or mesh adaptation — those are separate skills.
This description does four things that the bad and mediocre versions don't. First, it names the specific outputs the skill produces (aspect ratio, skewness, orthogonality, element count; concrete enough for the agent to match against a request for any of these). Second, it lists actual trigger phrases in the natural language a researcher would use. Third, it states what the output looks like (a structured report with pass/fail thresholds). Fourth, it includes negative triggers—what the skill does not do—, which prevents false activation on related but distinct tasks.
Anthropic's own guidance is explicit on this point: write descriptions that make the skill "pushy," so the agent is confident to use it. Skills that are modest in their descriptions—that hedge or use vague language—end up under-triggering. You want the opposite of modesty here. You want the description to be assertive enough that when a matching request comes in, the agent has no hesitation.
One more practical note that has tripped up many people. Nate Jones, whose framework we discussed above, flags this as a critical technical constraint: the skill description in the YAML frontmatter must remain on a single logical line. If a code formatter, a text editor's auto-wrap, or a careless edit breaks the description onto multiple physical lines without proper YAML folding syntax, Claude Code will read only the first line. The rest is silently lost.[9] The safest approach is to use YAML's > or >- block scalar syntax, which lets you write across multiple lines in the source file while producing a single string. That's what the example above does. If you write the description as a single long line instead, it works too; just make sure your editor doesn't wrap it.
Where should your attention go as a skill author? Jones offers a useful rule of thumb: spend 80% of your effort on the description field (getting the trigger right), 20% on the methodology body (clear reasoning and output format), and whatever remains on edge cases and examples.[10] This allocation sounds extreme until you've had the experience of writing a beautiful, detailed methodology body that never gets loaded because the description didn't match user queries. It is much better to have a perfect trigger with a just-adequate body than an inadequate trigger with a perfect body.
Five requirements for the methodology body
Once the description does its job and the agent loads your skill, the Markdown body is where the real work happens. There's no rigid schema—Claude Code reads it as Markdown and follows the instructions it contains—but effective skills tend to share five elements. We covered some of these briefly in Class 8 when we examined the manuscript-review skill. Now we can be more precise about why each element matters.
1. Reasoning, not just steps. The most common mistake in the body of a skill is writing a linear procedure: Step 1, Step 2, Step 3, done. Linear procedures work fine when the input matches exactly the case the author had in mind. They break the moment the input is even slightly different: a file format the author didn't anticipate, a data structure that doesn't match the expected shape, a physical situation that falls between two categories.
The fix is to include reasoning: the frameworks, quality criteria, and principles behind your decisions, not just the decisions themselves. Give the agent your mental model for the domain, not just the checklist you derived from it.
Consider the difference between these two examples:
Linear procedure (brittle): "Step 1: Check if Reynolds number exceeds 4000. If yes, use k-omega SST turbulence model."
Reasoning-based (robust): "Classify the flow regime by computing the Reynolds number. For pipe flows, the transition from laminar to turbulent typically occurs around Re ≈ 2300, with fully turbulent conditions above Re ≈ 4000. The transitional regime (2300 < Re < 4000) requires special attention; consider whether the application demands a conservative approach (assume turbulent) or whether transition modeling is warranted. For fully turbulent wall-bounded flows where the boundary layer must be resolved, k-omega SST is generally the recommended starting point because it combines the near-wall accuracy of k-omega with the freestream robustness of k-epsilon."
The linear procedure breaks when Re is 3000: the agent doesn't know what to do because the procedure doesn't cover that case! The reasoning-based version gives the agent enough understanding to make a sensible judgment. Reasoning helps LLMs generalize within a domain, which is exactly what you need when the skill will encounter inputs you didn't anticipate.
This connects to a point from an example we’ll discuss later, where some of the open-source engineering skills encode turbulence model selection as a decision tree with hard cutoffs, while more sophisticated ones provide the physical rationale alongside the thresholds. In the evaluation activity of this class you'll see both patterns, and you'll be able to judge which one you'd trust in an unsupervised agent pipeline.
2. Specified output format. "Produce a summary" is not an output specification. An agent receiving that instruction will generate some kind of summary, but its structure, length, level of detail, and format will vary unpredictably across invocations. If you're the only human who ever reads the output, that variability might be tolerable. If the output feeds into a downstream process—another skill, another agent, a script that parses it, a report that expects specific sections—variability is a failure mode.
Specify the output concretely. Is it Markdown? A LaTeX file? A CSV? A JSON structure? Does it have specific sections or fields? What are they called? What does each one contain?
The manuscript-review skill from Class 8 is a good example of this: it specifies that the output is a structured report with five sections (one per audit pass), each containing findings tagged by severity (critical, major, minor), with before/after pairs showing the original text and the suggested revision. That level of specificity means every invocation produces output in the same shape, which makes it easy to compare results across runs, track improvements, and build the output into a larger workflow.
In the code-reviewer skill that Poudel walks through in his guide, the output is similarly structured: a Summary section (2–3 sentences), a Blocking Issues section (things that must be fixed), a Suggestions section (non-blocking improvements, numbered), and a Positive Notes section (what the code does well, always including at least one).[11] The agent knows exactly what to produce, the human knows exactly what to expect, and—crucially—any downstream agent that consumes this output knows exactly where to find each piece of information.
For your research contexts, think about what "done" looks like. A figure-formatting skill should specify: output as a 300+ DPI PDF, single-column width (3.5 inches) or double-column (7 inches), with specific fonts and sizes for axis labels, titles, tick marks, and annotations. A convergence-analysis skill should specify: output as a Markdown report with a table of grid levels, Richardson extrapolation estimate, observed order of convergence, and a pass/fail determination against a specified tolerance. The more concrete you are, the more predictable the agent's behavior.
3. Explicit edge cases. This is the requirement that feels most tedious and is most often skipped; skipping it is the most reliable way to produce a skill that works in demos and fails in practice.
The problem is straightforward: LLMs do not have common sense in the way a domain expert does. An experienced CFD researcher knows, without being told, that a mesh with negative volumes should halt the pipeline, that a simulation that hasn't converged in twice the expected number of iterations probably has a setup error, that experimental data with a column labeled "T" might be temperature in Celsius or Kelvin depending on the source. These are the judgment calls that experienced practitioners make automatically and that new students take months to develop. They are also the judgment calls that an LLM will not make unless you write them down.
Every edge case that a human would handle through experience or common sense needs to be stated explicitly in the skill. This is not a philosophical claim about the limits of AI, it's a practical observation from six months of community experience. Skills that leave edge cases implicit produce subtly wrong results in the exact situations where correctness matters most, because edge cases are, by definition, the situations where the default behavior is inappropriate.
One of the examples we’ll review is the materials-simulation-skills repository,[12] where skills encode explicit protocols for edge cases: what to do when mesh skewness is borderline (flag but don't halt), what to do when a CFL number exceeds the stability limit by a small margin (reduce time step by 50% rather than a fixed amount), what to do when sensor data contains dropouts longer than a specified duration (flag as invalid rather than interpolate). Whether or not those specific protocols match your domain conventions, the pattern of stating edge cases explicitly is what matters.
4. An example to pattern-match against. Examples are the single most effective way to communicate expectations to an LLM. This is true in prompting, and it's equally true in skills. You can write paragraphs of instructions explaining what a good output looks like, or you can show one concrete example and accomplish the same thing in a fraction of the tokens.
This is why the skills folder can contain more than just SKILL.md. The pattern that Poudel demonstrates, and that you'll see in many well-designed skills, is to split the skill into the core SKILL.md file (which stays lean) and supplementary files in a references/ subdirectory (which contain examples, lookup tables, detailed criteria, and other material that the agent loads only when needed). This takes advantage of the three-level loading system: the SKILL.md body is Level 2 (loaded when triggered, ideally under a few thousand tokens), and the reference files are Level 3 (loaded on demand during execution, effectively unlimited in size).[13]
For a figure-formatting skill, for example, the references/ folder might contain a sample figure that meets your lab's standards, plus the journal's actual author guidelines PDF. For a writing-review skill, it might contain a before/after example showing a cluttered paragraph transformed into clean prose using the skill's methodology. For a data-cleaning skill, it might contain a sample CSV with deliberately introduced problems (missing values, outliers, unit inconsistencies) and the expected output after cleaning.
5. Keep it lean. This is the requirement that's hardest to apply because it runs counter to the instinct to be thorough. You've just read four requirements telling you to include reasoning, output formats, edge cases, and examples. The natural impulse is to write a 500-line SKILL.md that covers everything.
Resist that impulse. A short skill that fires reliably outperforms a long skill with competing instructions. The reason is that LLMs, including the most capable ones, can lose track of instructions when the context is overloaded with detail. Competing instructions—two rules that could apply to the same situation but suggest different actions—are particularly dangerous because the agent must choose between them, and it may not choose the way you intended. Shorter skills have fewer opportunities for internal contradiction.
Jones offers a practical rule of thumb: the core SKILL.md file should be roughly 50–150 lines for most use cases.[14] You can (and should) put detailed reference material, examples, and lookup tables in supplementary files that the agent loads on demand at Level 3. But the main file, the thing the agent reads when it first activates the skill, should be concise enough that the agent can hold the entire logic in working memory without dilution.
The academic-research-skills repository we examined in Class 8 has SKILL.md files that run to thousands of lines, but those evolved over many iterations by a developer who was pushing the limits of the format. For your purposes as engineering researchers, the sweet spot is the 50–150 line range: enough to encode real expertise, short enough to be reliable. Start simple and add detail only when you discover, through testing, that the agent is missing a case that matters.
From human-facing to agent-first: four design shifts
Everything above applies whether the caller is a human or an agent. But as we discussed earlier, the center of gravity has shifted toward agent callers. When agents are the primary consumers of your skill, four additional design principles come into play.
Description as routing signal. When a human invokes a skill, the description serves as a label: a way for the human to recognize which skill does what, or for the agent to match a natural-language request to the right skill. But when an agent invokes a skill as part of a multi-step workflow, the description serves a more precise function: it's a routing signal that tells the calling agent where to send a particular sub-task.
The difference is subtle but important. A human-facing description can be somewhat conversational: "Use this skill to review writing quality." An agent-facing description needs to be precise about the outcome the skill produces, because the calling agent is matching on outcomes, not on conversational intent. The description should contain wording that corresponds to the goals and sub-goals the orchestrating agent has been given. If the orchestrator's instructions say "ensure all figures meet publication standards," the figure-formatting skill's description should include language like "ensures figures meet publication standards," not just "formats figures." The match needs to be robust enough that the orchestrator can confidently route to this skill from among potentially dozens of available options.
Output as contract. When a human reads the output of a skill, they can interpret it flexibly. They can skip sections that aren't relevant, infer structure that isn't explicit, and recognize when something is approximately right even if the format isn't exactly what they expected. An agent consuming the same output cannot do any of those things. It needs to know exactly what it's getting, in what format, with what fields, so it can parse the output and act on it.
This is why the output specification in an agent-first skill should be framed as a contract—an explicit, declarative agreement about what the skill produces. Think of it as analogous to an API specification. What fields are returned? What types are they? What is guaranteed to be present and what is optional? What does the absence of a field mean?
For example, a mesh-quality skill's output contract might specify: "Returns a Markdown report with a table containing one row per quality metric (aspect ratio, skewness, orthogonality), columns for minimum, maximum, mean, and threshold, and a final row with an overall PASS or FAIL determination. If any metric exceeds its threshold, the overall determination is FAIL and the report includes a Recommendations section listing specific refinement actions." An agent reading this output can reliably extract the PASS/FAIL determination and branch its workflow accordingly: proceed to solver setup on PASS, trigger mesh refinement on FAIL.
Composability for handoffs. This principle directly connects to multi-agent systems. Don't think of a skill as solving a problem in isolation. Think of it as producing output that will be consumed by the next step in a pipeline, whether that next step is another skill, another agent, or a human reviewer.
If you're designing a skill for a multi-step workflow—say, a simulation pipeline that goes from geometry definition to mesh generation to solver setup to post-processing each skill needs to produce output that the next skill can accept as input. The mesh-generation skill's output needs to contain the information the solver-setup skill expects (mesh file path, element count, quality metrics). The solver-setup skill's output needs to contain the information the post-processing skill expects (results directory, variable names, time steps).
If you design each skill in isolation, optimizing only for the quality of its own output, you'll end up with breaks at every handoff point. The mesh-generation skill produces a beautiful mesh report, but it doesn't include the file path in a parseable format. The solver-setup skill generates excellent configuration files, but it doesn't record which variables were solved for. Each skill works perfectly on its own and fails when connected.
Composability means designing the output of each skill with the next consumer in mind. It means standardizing the interface between skills so that adding a new skill to the pipeline doesn't require modifying all the existing ones. This is the same principle that makes modular software work—well-defined interfaces between components—applied to the skills context.
Scripts for determinism; skills for reasoning. This last principle is one that Jones emphasizes and that we will reinforce with specific examples: if a behavior must be guaranteed, not probabilistically likely, but guaranteed, use a deterministic script, not a natural-language instruction in the skill body.
Skills are probabilistic. The agent reads the instructions, interprets them, and produces output that is usually consistent with the instructions but not identically reproducible. For most of what skills do—structuring a review, formatting a report, choosing an analysis approach, deciding which turbulence model to recommend—that probabilistic flexibility is a feature, because it allows the agent to handle novel inputs gracefully.
But some operations must be exact. A CFL number calculation should produce the same result every time. A unit conversion from psi to Pascals should not be left to the agent's judgment. A mesh quality metric should be computed from a formula, not estimated from natural language. For these operations, the right approach is to put a Python script (or Bash script, or any executable) in the skill's scripts/ subdirectory and instruct the skill body to call that script. The skill provides the reasoning layer—when to compute the CFL number, what to do with the result, how to interpret borderline cases—while the script provides the deterministic computation.
The materials-simulation-skills repository from our example list illustrates this pattern: it includes Python scripts like cfl_checker.py and von_neumann_analyzer.py alongside SKILL.md files that tell the agent when and how to use them.[15] The SKILL.md handles the reasoning ("if the CFL number exceeds 1.0, reduce the time step"); the script handles the arithmetic ("CFL = u × Δt / Δx"). Together, they produce a skill that reasons flexibly about numerical stability while computing the actual metrics with deterministic reliability.
Using scripts where determinism is required is simply good engineering, not a workaround or a sign of insufficient AI literacy. Part of what makes terminal agents powerful is that they exist in the execution environment: they can run code, not just generate it. A skill that leverages both the agent's reasoning and the computer's arithmetic is using each tool for what it does best.
The allowed-tools field: a safety lever
One additional mechanism worth knowing about, particularly in a research context where you may want to create skills that analyze without modifying, is the allowed-tools field in the YAML frontmatter. Poudel documents this in his guide, and it solves a specific problem: how do you write a skill that reads and reports without accidentally triggering side effects?[16]
When you specify allowed-tools in the frontmatter, you restrict which tools the agent can call while the skill is active. For example, a log-analysis skill that should read log files and report patterns—but should never write files, execute code, or make network calls—can include allowed-tools: Read, Grep, Glob in its frontmatter. With this restriction active, the agent cannot accidentally modify anything, even if a malformed instruction in the body could be interpreted as a write command.
For research, this is useful for skills that review or assess without changing anything: a manuscript-review skill that should produce feedback but never edit the source files directly, a data-validation skill that should flag anomalies but never alter the dataset, a simulation-review skill that should check configuration files but never modify them. The allowed-tools field is currently marked as experimental in the Agent Skills specification (support varies between platforms) but it's well-supported in Claude Code and worth knowing about as a safety mechanism.[17]
The three-tier model: thinking about audience
Before you begin designing a skill, one question shapes every other decision: who is this skill for? The answer determines how you write the description, how much domain context you include in the body, and where you deploy it.
The three-tier model, drawn from Jones's community observations and from enterprise deployment patterns, provides a useful taxonomy:
Tier 1 — Standard skills. These are consistent across your organization (or lab). Brand voice, formatting rules, approved templates, citation conventions, unit systems. They encode the "we always do it this way" knowledge that every member of the team needs to follow. In a research lab, Tier 1 skills might include: your target journal's figure formatting requirements, your group's convention for SI units and significant figures, your lab's standard LaTeX preamble and bibliography style, or the writing standards from our Class 8 Sainani skill. These skills are provisioned widely; in enterprise deployments, IT admins push them to every user; in a lab, you'd put them in a shared repository that every project clones.
The description for a Tier 1 skill should be broad enough to trigger whenever anyone in the team is doing the relevant task, and the body should be authoritative: these are not suggestions, they're standards.
Tier 2 — Methodology skills. These encode how your team performs high-value work. Not the formatting conventions, but the actual intellectual methodology: the process a senior practitioner follows when doing the hard part of the job. How your group sets up a simulation. How the most experienced student in the lab does post-processing. How your advisor structures a journal paper. The litmus test is: what would you want to communicate to a new graduate student that would take them months to learn otherwise? That's a Tier 2 skill.
Tier 2 skills are harder to write than Tier 1, because the expertise lives inside practitioners' heads and has never been written down in operational detail. It's one thing to know that you should check mesh quality before running a solver; it's another to articulate the specific metrics you check, the thresholds you use, the order in which you check them, and what you do when the results are borderline. But this is precisely where skills have the most leverage: the knowledge that's hardest to transfer is the knowledge that benefits most from being encoded.
Tier 3 — Personal workflow skills. These are individual productivity tools: your personal checklist for reviewing a draft, your data-cleaning sequence, your preferred way of organizing simulation output directories. They may be too idiosyncratic to share widely, but Jones cautions against keeping them only on your laptop. When you're traveling, sick, or have moved on to a different project, a colleague may need to replicate your process, and if the skill is on your personal machine and nowhere else, they're stuck.
The tier classification matters for Assignment 4 because it shapes the scope and ambition of what you build. A Tier 1 skill (lab-wide formatting standard) is relatively straightforward to write and immediately useful. A Tier 2 skill (encoding a research methodology) is harder to write but more valuable. A Tier 3 skill (personal workflow) is the easiest starting point if you're building your first skill from scratch. Any tier is a valid choice for the assignment; just be deliberate about which one you're targeting, because the description, the level of detail, and the deployment strategy all follow from that choice.
Debugging when a skill doesn't fire
Even with a well-designed skill, you'll occasionally encounter the frustrating situation where you ask the agent to do something that your skill was designed to handle and nothing happens; the agent proceeds with its general knowledge instead of loading your skill. Poudel provides a systematic debugging checklist that's worth internalizing:[18]
The most likely culprit is the description. Re-read it and ask: does it contain the actual words the user (or agent) is using? If you asked "check my mesh" but the description says "performs comprehensive mesh quality evaluation," the agent may not see a strong enough match. Add the trigger phrases people actually use.
The next thing to check is the file path. The SKILL.md must be in the expected directory: ~/.claude/skills/your-skill-name/SKILL.md for a personal skill, .claude/skills/your-skill-name/SKILL.md for a project-level skill. A misplaced file is invisible to the agent.
Then check the YAML syntax. Invalid YAML in the frontmatter—a missing closing ---, a misplaced colon, an unescaped special character—silently prevents loading. The file must begin on line 1 with --- and the frontmatter must close with another ---. One easy mistake: using XML angle brackets (< or >) in the frontmatter, which can interfere with how the description is injected into the system prompt.
If you edited the skill during a running session, restart the session. Skills are read at session startup; edits made while the agent is running aren't picked up until you begin a new session.
Finally, test with explicit invocation. If you say "Use the mesh-quality skill to assess this grid" and the agent responds correctly, but saying "check my mesh" doesn't trigger the skill, then the issue is specifically in the description's trigger coverage: the skill works, it just isn't being discovered by the implicit matching process. The fix is to add more natural-language trigger phrases to the description.
A note on security
Skills can bundle executable scripts, reference documents, and instructions that direct agent behavior. This power is exactly what makes them useful, and it's also what makes careless installation of untrusted skills risky. The same mechanism that lets a trusted skill run a Python script to calculate CFL numbers could, in a malicious skill, run a script that exfiltrates data or modifies files you didn't intend to change.
This isn't a theoretical concern. Security researchers have already flagged the risks of community-distributed skills, and Anthropic's own documentation recommends treating skills with the same scrutiny you'd apply to any external code you install.[19] For our purposes in this course, the practical guidance is straightforward: before installing any community skill, read every file in the folder—especially anything in scripts/. If a skill instructs the agent to make outbound network calls or send data to external services, treat that as a red flag. Prefer skills from sources you've verified (official repositories, known authors, or your own team), and when evaluating skills from unfamiliar sources—as we'll do in the hands-on activity—read them critically, the way you'd read source code before incorporating it into a research pipeline.
This connects to a broader principle we've been developing throughout the course: the ability to evaluate AI-generated artifacts critically is as important as the ability to generate them. A beautifully structured skill that encodes physically incorrect protocols is worse than no skill at all, because it produces incorrect results with the appearance of rigor. Your domain expertise is the quality check that no amount of formatting can replace.
Hands-On Activity: Evaluating Skills in the Wild
We've spent a lot of time on principles. Now we apply them. The activity for the rest of class is straightforward: you're going to read real SKILL.md files written by other people, assess them against the design criteria we just discussed, and report what you find. This is the skill-literacy equivalent of a code review, and like in code review, you learn as much from reading other people's work critically as you do from writing your own.
The landscape: what's out there
A quick orientation first: I ran a deep-research investigation into skills repositories relevant to the physical sciences, and the results are both encouraging and cautionary. There is a growing ecosystem of engineering-oriented skills on GitHub, covering CFD, FEA, materials science, data cleaning, scientific writing, and more. Some of them are well-structured and clearly written by practitioners with domain expertise. Others are what you might generously call "vibe-coded"— generated with AI assistance, structurally polished, but possibly never tested against a real engineering problem by someone who would catch a physically incorrect protocol. A few are ambitious multi-agent pipelines that push the skills concept to its limits.
Here are the repositories we'll be drawing from today:
Soljourner/claude-engineering-skills is a collection of skills for mechanical, aerospace, and general engineering tasks: structural analysis, fluid dynamics, orbital mechanics, unit conversion. It's modular, includes supporting scripts, and is the closest to our domain of any open-source skills repository I found. The unit-converter skill in particular is interesting because it addresses a problem that has historically caused catastrophic failures in engineering: it provides deterministic Python implementations rather than letting the agent guess conversion factors. https://github.com/Soljourner/claude-engineering-skills 
HeshamFS/materials-simulation-skills focuses on computational materials science: numerical stability, solvers, meshing, convergence, and simulation workflows. It also includes ontology-mapping skills that let an agent navigate materials science databases like CMSO and ASMO—a sophisticated application that bridges simulation and semantic knowledge. The mesh-generation and numerical-stability skills include Python scripts for CFL calculations and mesh quality metrics. https://github.com/HeshamFS/materials-simulation-skills 
K-Dense-AI/claude-scientific-skills is broader in scope, covering molecular dynamics (using OpenMM and MDAnalysis), time-series analysis, and general scientific research tools. It demonstrates the range of what people are packaging as skills, though the breadth means individual skills may have less depth than the more focused repositories. https://github.com/K-Dense-AI/claude-scientific-skills 
webworn/openfoam-mcp-server is not a skill in the SKILL.md sense but an MCP server with a "Socratic" educational layer for OpenFOAM. Instead of simply generating case files, it asks the student questions about flow regime and provides "5 Whys" error resolution when a solver crashes. It represents a fundamentally different philosophy—a skill designed for learning rather than automation—and it's worth examining as a contrast to the others. https://github.com/webworn/openfoam-mcp-server 
openclaw/skills is the OpenClaw community repository, organized by contributor. It contains skills across many domains, including a data-analyst skill. Quality is variable, as you'd expect from a community-contributed collection, which makes it useful for exactly the kind of critical evaluation we're doing today. https://github.com/openclaw/skills/blob/main/skills/oyi77/data-analyst/SKILL.md 
dkyazzentwatwa/chatgpt-skills is a tested and audited library designed for ChatGPT rather than Claude Code. It's useful for cross-platform comparison: same SKILL.md concept, different ecosystem, and the author claims to have verified and audited each skill, a claim worth evaluating. https://github.com/dkyazzentwatwa/chatgpt-skills 
The caveat I want to be explicit about: many of these skills have never been tested against real engineering problems by a domain expert. They may contain plausible-sounding but incorrect protocols: the right Reynolds number threshold in the wrong context, a turbulence model recommendation that's reasonable for one class of flows but inappropriate for another, a unit conversion formula that's correct in one direction but not the other. This is not a reason to dismiss them. It's the reason we're evaluating them. The ability to read a skill, assess its quality, and identify what's missing or wrong is the literacy this activity develops, and the exact literacy you'll need when you encounter skills in the wild throughout your career.
Your task
You'll work in pairs. Each pair picks one specific SKILL.md file. Your job is to read the skill carefully and evaluate it against the criteria below, the same criteria we derived from the design principles in the first half of class. Take about 30 minutes to read and discuss, making notes as you go, then each pair will give a 2–3 minute summary to the class. Evaluate according to:
Description quality. Is the description specific enough to trigger accurately? Does it name the artifact types or outputs the skill produces? Does it include plausible trigger phrases, the words a researcher would actually say? Does it specify what the skill does not cover (negative triggers)? Is it on a single logical line or using proper YAML folding? If you imagine 20 skills installed simultaneously, would an agent confidently select this one based on the description alone?
Methodology body. Does the body provide reasoning—frameworks, principles, quality criteria—or only linear steps? Is the output format specified concretely (file type, sections, fields)? Are edge cases addressed explicitly? Is there at least one example or worked demonstration, either inline or in a reference file? Is the skill lean (roughly 50–150 lines for the core SKILL.md), or does it contain competing instructions that could confuse the agent?
Domain correctness. This is where your engineering expertise is irreplaceable. Are the encoded protocols physically and mathematically correct? Are thresholds, formulas, and recommendations appropriate for the stated use case? Would you trust this skill to run unsupervised in an agent pipeline on your own research data? If not, what specifically would you need to verify or change? What does the skill leave out that an experienced practitioner would know to include?
Agent readiness. Is the output structured for handoff to a downstream process (composability)? Does the skill use deterministic scripts where appropriate, or does it rely on natural language for calculations that should be exact? Could you write a test case for this skill, a concrete input and expected output against which you could verify correct behavior?
Overall judgment. What is the single best design decision in this skill? What is the single most important change you would make? On the spectrum from "interesting starting point" to "production-ready," where does this skill fall, and what would it take to move it forward?
How this connects forward
The rubric you're using today is the same rubric you should apply to your own work in Assignment 4. Think of this activity as calibration: by the time you've read and critiqued someone else's skill, you'll have a much sharper sense of what "good" looks like, and what pitfalls to avoid, when you sit down to write your own. It also previews content we'll cover later. Several of the repositories we're examining today include orchestrator patterns: skills that coordinate multiple sub-agents, or skills designed to produce output that feeds into other skills. When you evaluate composability and handoff structure, you're already thinking about multi-agent design, even if we haven't formally introduced the topic yet. The design principles for individual skills and the design principles for agent teams are not separate subjects; they're the same principles applied at different scales.




________________
[1] Anthropic, Agent Skills beta release, API version skills-2025-10-02. See also: InfoQ coverage of the launch: https://www.infoq.com/news/2025/10/anthropic-claude-skills/
[2] Anthropic, "Equipping agents for the real world with Agent Skills," engineering blog, October 2025, updated December 18, 2025: https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/equipping-agents-for-the-real-world-with-agent-skills. 
[3] VentureBeat, "Anthropic launches enterprise 'Agent Skills' and opens the standard," December 22, 2025: https://venturebeat.com/technology/anthropic-launches-enterprise-agent-skills-and-opens-the-standard/
[4] The New Stack, "Agent Skills: Anthropic's Next Bid to Define AI Standards," December 18, 2025: https://thenewstack.io/agent-skills-anthropics-next-bid-to-define-ai-standards/
[5] The engineering blog post (footnote 2) includes a detailed walkthrough of progressive disclosure, the three levels of skill loading, and examples of production skills ranging from simple document formatting to multi-agent research pipelines.
[6] Anthropic release notes, March 2026. See the Releasebot changelog for a consolidated view: https://releasebot.io/updates/anthropic/claude
[7] Nate Jones, Anthropic, OpenAI, and Microsoft Just Agreed on One File Format. It Changes Everything., video essay, 30 March 2026.
[8] Bibek Poudel, "The SKILL.md Pattern: How to Write AI Agent Skills That Actually Work," Medium, Feb. 2026, https://bibek-poudel.medium.com/the-skill-md-pattern-how-to-write-ai-agent-skills-that-actually-work-72a3169dd7ee  The article walks through four complete skills of increasing complexity and is one of the clearest available guides to the practical mechanics of skill authoring across Claude Code, OpenAI Codex, and OpenClaw.
[9] Nate Jones, see footnote 7. The single-line description constraint is also documented in the Agent Skills specification at agentskills.io, which allows up to 1,024 characters in the description field.
[10] Jones, ibid. The 80/20 attention allocation is a practitioner heuristic, not a formal specification, but it reflects the consistent finding that under-triggering (caused by inadequate descriptions) is the dominant failure mode.
[11] Poudel, ibid. The code-reviewer skill demonstrates the pattern of separating the main SKILL.md (which stays under ~40 lines) from detailed reference material in a references/criteria.md file that loads only during execution.
[12] Hesham Salama, Materials Simulation Skills, https://github.com/HeshamFS/materials-simulation-skills 
[13] This Level 2 / Level 3 split is a core architectural feature of the progressive disclosure system. Anthropic's engineering blog describes it as providing "effectively unbounded" context through dynamic loading; the agent can access as much reference material as it needs, but only the currently relevant material enters the context window.
[14] Jones, ibid. The 50–150 line guideline is consistent with Anthropic's own examples: the pre-built document skills that ship with Claude (for Word, Excel, PowerPoint, PDF) range from approximately 100 to 400 lines, with the longer ones handling significantly more complex format specifications.
[15] HeshamFS/materials-simulation-skills, ibid. The pattern of pairing deterministic scripts with reasoning-based SKILL.md instructions is also documented in Anthropic's engineering blog, which describes it as providing "deterministic reliability that only code can provide" for operations better suited to computation than token generation.
[16] Poudel, ibid. The allowed-tools field is part of the Agent Skills specification but is marked as experimental. Poudel's log-analyzer example illustrates the pattern of using allowed-tools: Read, Grep, Glob to create a read-only skill. 
[17] The experimental status of allowed-tools is documented at agentskills.io/specification. Claude Code currently supports it; other platforms may vary. 
[18] Poudel, ibid. The debugging checklist covers description quality, file paths, YAML syntax, session restart behavior, and explicit vs. implicit invocation testing.
[19] Anthropic's Agent Skills documentation (https://platform.claude.com/docs/en/agents-and-tools/agent-skills/overview) recommends reading all files in a skill folder before installation. Community security concerns are discussed in Poudel's guide and in various practitioner blog posts.